Thermoregulation and Heat Acclimatization in
Endurance Athletes: A Coaching Guide
Introduction
Training and racing in hot weather present unique challenges for endurance athletes of all levels, from
amateur  to  professional.  Heat  stress  can  significantly  impair  performance  in  both  long-duration
endurance events and high-intensity efforts . When body temperature rises during exercise, athletes
experience  quicker  muscle  fatigue,  cardiovascular  strain,  and  even  central  nervous  system
impairment , all of which degrade performance . For example, muscle glycogen is depleted faster
and lactate accumulates more in the heat, hastening fatigue, while the brain’s drive to exercise can
diminish as core temperature rises . In practical terms, a run or ride that feels easy on a cool day
can feel immensely difficult in high heat and humidity. 
Thermoregulation  is the body’s ability to maintain a stable internal temperature. During exercise,
especially in the heat, the body must shed the excess heat produced by working muscles to keep core
temperature in a safe range (~37°C). If heat gain outpaces heat loss, core temperature will rise, leading
to  performance  decline  and  potential  heat  illness .  Endurance  athletes  and  coaches  need  to
understand how the body responds to heat and how to adapt training strategies accordingly. This guide
will cover: 
Cardiovascular responses to heat stress:  how hot conditions affect heart rate, stroke volume,
and cardiac output due to blood flow redistribution to the skin. 
Physiological adaptations from heat acclimatization:  the beneficial changes from heat
training, including plasma volume expansion, increased sweat rate, and electrolyte (salt)
conservation. 
Practical heat training strategies:  how to safely acclimatize athletes of varying experience
(amateur , semi-pro, pro) to heat through training or other methods, while avoiding heat-related
illnesses. 
Pacing and performance adjustments in heat:  algorithms and correction factors (with
pseudocode-style guidance) to adjust training paces and race targets based on temperature and
humidity (dew point), helping athletes perform optimally without overheating.
By integrating scientific insights with coaching practice, this guide aims to help coaches and athletes
mitigate  the  negative  effects  of  heat  and  harness  heat  acclimatization  to  improve  endurance
performance in hot conditions.
Thermoregulation Basics: How the Body Manages Heat
During exercise, about 70-80% of energy expended is released as heat. This raises the body’s core
temperature,  especially  during  endurance  events.  The  body’s  thermoregulatory  system  works  to
dissipate this heat through: sweating  (evaporative cooling) and increased skin blood flow  (convective/
radiative cooling) . The cardiovascular system plays a key role in thermoregulation: blood transports
heat from the core to the skin where it can be released. When ambient conditions are cooler than the
skin, heat can radiate or convect away; but in hot environments, evaporation of sweat becomes the1
1
23
4
• 
• 
• 
• 
5
1

---PAGE---

primary cooling mechanism . High humidity impairs this process because sweat cannot evaporate
effectively into saturated air , which is why muggy conditions feel so oppressive. 
Sweating:  As core temperature rises, sweat glands produce sweat that carries heat as it evaporates
from the skin. Evaporation has a powerful cooling effect – but only if the sweat can evaporate. In a dry
climate, sweat evaporates quickly, cooling the body efficiently. In a humid climate (high dew point),
evaporation is slowed, so sweat drips off without cooling, and the body gains heat. Coaches should
teach athletes that  hydration  and proper pacing are critical in heat to maintain sweating without
dehydration. It’s also important to note that unacclimatized athletes start sweating later and at a higher
core temperature compared to heat-adapted athletes. With acclimatization, the body begins sweating
sooner (at a lower temperature) and more profusely, enhancing cooling (more on this in later sections)
.
Skin blood flow:  The circulatory system redistributes blood toward the skin to dump heat. During
exercise in the heat, blood vessels in the skin dilate, and a significant portion of cardiac output is
redirected from working muscles to the skin surface. This helps release heat via the skin, but it comes at
a cost – it can reduce venous return to the heart and divert blood that would otherwise supply the
muscles. We will discuss the implications of this blood flow competition  between skin and muscle in
the next section on cardiovascular responses. 
In summary, the human “thermostat” strives to balance heat gain and loss. If heat loss (through sweat
evaporation and skin blood flow) cannot keep up with heat production,  core temperature rises  and
performance  declines.  Endurance  coaches  should  be  mindful  that  even  a  well-trained  athlete  can
overheat if the conditions exceed their body’s cooling capacity. The margin for maintaining thermal
homeostasis  is  narrow:  core  temperatures  above  ~40°C  (104°F)  can  lead  to  hyperthermia ,  with
dizziness, central fatigue, or in severe cases heat stroke. Therefore, understanding and respecting
thermoregulation is the first step to effective training in the heat.
Cardiovascular Strain in the Heat: Heart Rate vs. Stroke Volume
One of the most immediate impacts of heat stress on an endurance athlete is cardiovascular drift  – a
progressive increase in heart rate and decrease in stroke volume during prolonged exercise in the heat.
Let’s break down why this happens and how it affects cardiac output  (the volume of blood the heart
pumps per minute). Cardiac output (CO) is the product of heart rate (HR) and stroke volume (SV). In
cooler conditions, an athlete maintains CO by a balanced HR and SV. In hot conditions, maintaining CO
becomes challenging due to thermoregulatory demands:
Skin Blood Flow and Stroke Volume:  As mentioned, when exercising in the heat, the body
diverts more blood to the skin to dissipate heat. This skin blood flow “steals” blood from the
central circulation. With more blood pooling in dilated skin vessels, less blood returns to the
heart ,  leading  to  a  drop  in  stroke  volume  (the  amount  of  blood  ejected  each  heartbeat).
Essentially,  the  heart’s  left  ventricle  fills  less  completely  on  each  beat  because  some  blood
volume is held in the skin circulation. If an athlete becomes dehydrated , this effect is magnified:
sweating without adequate fluid replacement reduces blood volume, further lowering stroke
volume. It’s not uncommon to see stroke volume significantly reduced during long workouts on
hot days.
Heart Rate Increase:  To compensate for the falling stroke volume, heart rate rises. The body
attempts to maintain cardiac output by pumping faster since each pump is delivering less blood.
Coaches will notice athletes’ heart rates creeping upward over time even if pace or power output6
7
8
• 
• 
2

---PAGE---

remains constant – classic  cardiovascular drift . For example, an athlete might hold a steady
8:00/mile pace, but their HR after 30-40 minutes in the heat could be 10-15 beats higher than it
was early in the run. This is the body’s way of preserving blood flow output despite the thermal
strain. Exercise physiologists note that exercising in a hot environment produces an increased
heart rate and decreased stroke volume  compared to cool conditions . This happens even
without dehydration in moderate exercise; at higher intensities or with dehydration, the effect is
more pronounced .
Competition Between Skin and Muscle Blood Flow:  At high exercise intensities in the heat,
there is a literal tug-of-war for blood supply between the skin and the working muscles. Muscles
demand oxygen to sustain performance, but skin needs blood for cooling. As intensity rises, if
skin blood flow remains high, muscle blood flow can actually decline , since the cardiovascular
system has a limited capacity . Reduced muscle blood flow means less oxygen delivery to
muscles,  causing  earlier  fatigue .  This  is  one  reason  athletes  struggle  to  hit  high  power
outputs or fast paces in the heat – their muscles are effectively “starved” of some oxygen and
fuel  as  the  body  prioritizes  cooling.  Coaches  should  adjust  expectations  for  high-intensity
workouts in hot weather accordingly.
Limitations  on  Cardiac  Output  and  VO₂max:  Eventually,  the  heart  rate  compensation  has
limits. As core temperature climbs and dehydration progresses, an athlete’s  maximal cardiac
output  may be reduced in the heat. Even if heart rate rises, it can only rise to the athlete’s max
HR. If stroke volume is greatly reduced and HR is near max, cardiac output plateaus or falls. This
leads to a drop in maximal aerobic capacity – in fact, exercising in high heat can reduce VO₂max
because the athlete cannot reach the same maximal cardiac output as in cool conditions . In
simple  terms,  the  heart  cannot  pump  enough  blood  to  support  both  cooling  and  intense
exercise simultaneously. Research shows this “ceiling” on cardiac output is a key factor in why
VO₂max and performance decline in the heat . Coaches might observe that an athlete who
normally has a VO₂max of X when tested in cool conditions might effectively perform as if their
VO₂max is lower in hot conditions due to cardiovascular strain.
Higher Heart Rate for a Given Pace:  As a result of all the above, athletes will experience a
higher percentage of their max heart rate at any given submaximal pace in hot weather . This
means  a  pace  that  is  usually  “easy”  may  feel  moderate  or  hard.  The  rating  of  perceived
exertion (RPE)  also climbs in the heat . It’s important to communicate to athletes that this is
expected  in heat – they are not losing fitness; it’s a normal physiological response. 
Coaching Takeaway:  In hot conditions, expect heart rates ~5-15 bpm higher  than normal for a given
workload, and expect stroke volume and power output to be lower . This is why strict pace or power
targets must be adjusted in the heat (discussed in detail in the pacing section). Emphasize to athletes
that listening to their bodies (and perhaps using heart rate or perceived effort as a guide) is crucial.
Pushing to hold normal intensities in extreme heat can lead to overexertion or even heat illness  if the
athlete isn’t careful. Indeed, improper pacing in a hot environment can be hazardous . Coaches
should prioritize safety and cooling, encouraging athletes to slow down, take extra hydration breaks,
and if possible schedule hard sessions during cooler parts of the day.
(For a real-world perspective: early in heat exposure, athletes may even experience dizziness or fainting from
reduced blood pressure – one study noted that on day 1 of marching in desert heat, many participants
experienced  syncope,  but  after  five  days  of  acclimation,  none  did .  This  dramatic  improvement
underscores how hard the cardiovascular system works when unacclimatized, and how it adapts over time.)9
9
• 
10
11
• 
12
12
• 
13
14
15
3

---PAGE---

Heat Acclimatization: Physiological Adaptations to Heat Training
The good news is that with proper  heat acclimatization , an athlete’s body undergoes a series of
adaptations that mitigate the negative effects of heat. Heat acclimatization refers to the process of
training or exposure that leads to these adaptations, making the athlete more heat-tolerant and able
to  perform  better  in  hot  conditions .  Many  of  these  adaptations  directly  counter  the  issues  we
described  above,  improving  the  athlete’s  thermoregulation  and  cardiovascular  response.  Heat
acclimatization can occur in as little as 7–14 days of consistent heat exposure , with highly
trained athletes sometimes adapting more quickly (they may achieve adaptations ~50% faster than less
fit individuals) . Below, we detail the key physiological changes from heat training and  how they
benefit endurance performance :
1. Plasma Volume Expansion and Cardiovascular Stability
One of the earliest and most significant adaptations is an increase in blood plasma volume. Repeated
exercise-heat exposure triggers the kidneys to retain fluid (via hormonal signals like aldosterone and
vasopressin), leading to a larger blood volume. Studies show a  plasma volume increase of roughly
10%  (on the order of 10–12% in many individuals) after acclimation . This expansion can occur
rapidly – within the first 3–6 days of heat training . In practical terms, if an athlete had 5 liters of
blood, they might gain an extra 0.5 liter of plasma after a week of heat acclimation. 
How expanded plasma volume helps:  More blood volume means  more available fluid for sweat
production  (delaying dehydration) and  better maintenance of stroke volume and blood pressure
during exercise. With a higher circulating volume, when blood pools in the skin, enough remains to fill
the heart and supply muscles. Essentially, plasma expansion “fills the tank” so the cardiovascular system
can handle heat stress. Indeed, this adaptation helps maintain central blood volume and stroke volume,
allowing the body to store more heat before core temperature rises excessively . Athletes often
notice that after acclimation their heart rate is lower at a given pace  because stroke volume is higher
– the heart doesn’t need to beat as fast to pump the same cardiac output. A classic sign of heat
acclimatization is a lower exercising heart rate  in the heat compared to before . Research confirms
that heart rate reduction is one of the fastest adaptations , often improving within 4-5 days of heat
exposure (mostly complete by ~7 days) .
To illustrate the impact: In one study of trained cyclists, just 10 days of heat training (e.g. repeated
sessions in ~40°C conditions) increased plasma volume by ~6.5% and boosted stroke volume by ~5%,
which in turn even raised VO₂max by ~5% . This demonstrates that heat acclimation not only makes
hot-weather exercise easier but can also produce small performance gains in cooler conditions due to
enhanced cardiovascular function (though the primary aim of heat acclimation is to handle heat, some
coaches use it as a training stimulus for broader adaptation).
From  a  coaching  perspective,  plasma  volume  expansion  means  after  acclimation  your  athlete  can
sustain higher cardiac output in the heat with less strain. They will start to feel “stronger” on hot runs –
less drift in heart rate, less dizziness upon standing, etc. Note that this gain is  fluid-dependent : the
athlete must maintain hydration to capitalize on the larger blood volume. Dehydration can negate this
benefit, so continued emphasis on drinking to thirst (or a bit beyond, as needed) in hot conditions is
key.1617
18
19
20
19
21
2223
24
4

---PAGE---

2. Improved Sweat Response (Higher Sweat Rate & Earlier Onset)
Another hallmark adaptation is a more powerful and efficient sweating mechanism:
Earlier  Onset  of  Sweating:  After  heat  training,  athletes  begin  to  sweat  at  a  lower  core
temperature  and  often  sooner  in  exercise.  The  body  “learns”  to  activate  cooling  sooner ,
preventing the big spikes in core temperature. An acclimated athlete may start dripping sweat in
the  warm-up,  whereas  a  non-acclimated  person  might  not  sweat  much  until  well  into  the
session. This earlier onset means less heat storage at the start of exercise  and a lower core
temperature throughout the workout .
Higher Sweat Rate:  Heat-acclimated athletes can achieve and sustain a higher sweat output.
The sweat glands increase their capacity. In fact, sweat volume after full acclimation can be
nearly  double or even triple  what it was before . For example, if an unacclimated athlete
could maximally sweat ~1 liter per hour , an acclimated athlete might sweat 2–3 liters/hour when
needed  (with  adequate  hydration).  This  dramatically  boosts  the  body’s  cooling  potential  via
evaporation. Additionally, sweat distribution over the body surface becomes more uniform and
coverage improves , which means more skin area is effectively cooling. Acclimated sweat
glands also become more fatigue-resistant, so they keep producing high sweat rates even in
prolonged exercise or in humid conditions .
Greater Evaporative Cooling and Lower Skin Temperature:  With more sweat evaporating, the
skin  is  cooled  more  effectively.  Over  time,  acclimation  even  leads  to  a  slight  drop  in  skin
temperature  during exercise, because the enhanced sweating keeps the skin cooler . A
cooler skin temperature increases the temperature gradient between the body core and skin,
promoting heat transfer . It also means the body doesn’t need to send as much blood to the skin
for cooling. After acclimation, because sweating does more of the cooling work, skin blood flow
requirements can be reduced for the same heat load . By needing to divert less blood to
the skin, the athlete preserves more blood for the muscles and for maintaining stroke volume –
reducing cardiovascular strain. This interplay is critical: earlier and heavier sweating reduces
heat storage, which lowers skin (and core) temperature, which then lessens the reliance on
extreme skin vasodilation. Ultimately, this leads to improved thermoregulatory efficiency  and
better performance in the heat .
For coaches, these sweat adaptations mean your athlete will handle heat better: they’ll cool themselves
more aggressively (sweat more) and sooner , preventing the early overheating that can derail a workout
or race. However , a higher sweat rate also means  increased fluid needs  – acclimated athletes must
drink more to match their greater sweat losses. Ensure that during heat training blocks, athletes stay on
top  of  hydration  (and  possibly  electrolyte  intake,  discussed  next)  to  leverage  their  new  sweating
capacity effectively. It’s also wise to schedule frequent drink breaks during training until the athlete is
accustomed to the fluid intake required for their higher sweat rates.
3. Electrolyte Conservation (Reduced Salt Loss)
When people first start exercising in the heat, they often lose a lot of salt (sodium and chloride) in their
sweat – you might notice white salt stains on clothing. As part of heat acclimatization, the body adjusts
sweat  gland  function  to  conserve  sodium ,  an  essential  electrolyte.  The  hormone  aldosterone
increases in response to heat, which makes sweat glands and kidneys retain more sodium. As a result,
acclimatized athletes have sweat that is more dilute (less salty). • 
25
• 
26
2728
8
• 
829
29
29
5

---PAGE---

How much does it change? An unacclimated person’s sweat might contain about 60 mmol of sodium
per liter (or more) ; after acclimation, it could drop to as low as ~10 mmol/L . In practical terms, this
can be a reduction of well over 50–70% in the salt concentration of sweat. So even though an acclimated
athlete may sweat more volume, each liter of sweat carries far less sodium, protecting the body’s
electrolyte balance. This adaptation helps maintain  circulating blood sodium levels  and  total body
water . In fact, conserving sodium helps expand plasma volume further , because water follows sodium –
this is likely one contributor to the increased blood volume we discussed .
For coaches and athletes: reduced salt loss means lower risk of heat-induced cramping or hyponatremia
(low  blood  sodium ),  and  it  helps  athletes  sustain  performance  longer  before  electrolyte  depletion
becomes an issue. However , do not neglect sodium intake entirely  – athletes still need to replace salt
during long exercise, especially once they start acclimating and sweating more. The key is that their
sweat per liter  is less salty, but because total sweat output is higher , they will still be losing a substantial
total amount of salt over a long session. The practical advice is to include electrolyte-rich fluids or foods
during prolonged training/racing in heat, and particularly in the first week of heat acclimation when the
body is still adjusting . By the end of an acclimation period, the risk of sodium depletion drops
because  of  this  adaptive  reabsorption,  but  a  good  coach  will  ensure  the  athlete’s  hydration  plan
includes  some  electrolytes  to  match  their  sweat  losses.  (Individual  differences  are  large,  so  sweat
testing or at least trial-and-error can hone in on an athlete’s specific needs.)
4. Lower Core Temperature and Improved Thermal Comfort
With  all  the  above  changes  –  more  blood,  more  sweat,  less  salt  loss  –  the  net  effect  is  that  an
acclimatized athlete’s  core body temperature during exercise is lower  than it would be otherwise.
They can dissipate heat faster , so their internal temperature rises more slowly and stabilizes at a lower
level for a given workload. They also begin sweating at a lower core temperature threshold , which
helps keep the core cooler from the outset. This leads to improved  thermal comfort  – the athlete
simply feels less heat stress. Objectively, after a full acclimation, an athlete might see a reduction of 0.3–
0.5°C in their steady-state exercise core temperature and a several beats-per-minute lower heart rate,
compared to before acclimation (when exercising in the same heat conditions) . Subjectively,
what felt like a very hot, hard effort before might feel “manageable” after adaptation. This translates to
lower perceived exertion  at the same pace in heat , a huge psychological and physical benefit.
Heat-acclimatized individuals also incur  less disruption to their central nervous system  from heat.
While this area is still being studied, the fact that core temperatures are lower and cardiovascular strain
is reduced means the brain is under less thermal stress. The athlete can better maintain mental focus
and  drive  in  hot  conditions,  reducing  the  early  performance  decrement  that  comes  from  feeling
overheated and exhausted.
5. Heat Shock Proteins and Cellular Adaptations
On a cellular level, repeated heat exposure induces the production of  heat shock proteins (HSPs)  –
molecular “chaperones” that help protect cells from thermal damage. These proteins repair misfolded
proteins and stabilize cellular structures that might be stressed by heat. Heat acclimation training
increases HSP levels in many tissues (muscles, heart, etc.), enhancing what’s called Acquired Thermal
Tolerance . Essentially, the cells get better at surviving and functioning under heat stress. While
coaches don’t directly observe this in day-to-day training, it underlies the improved resilience of the
athlete. HSPs can reduce the risk of heat injury at the cellular level and may contribute to the endurance
performance  gains  by  preserving  muscle  function  during  heat  stress.  It’s  another  way  the  body
“hardens” itself through heat training.30
30
31
8
3233
2033
3435
6

---PAGE---

6. Timeline of Adaptations and Retention
Heat acclimatization is a relatively fast process, but different adaptations occur on slightly different
timelines. As a coach, it’s useful to know approximately when each benefit “kicks in” during a heat
training program:
Heart rate reduction:  Begins within 3-4 days, and substantial improvement by ~7 days .
Athletes often notice after a week that their easy run HR is not spiking as much in the heat.
Plasma volume expansion:  Starts in 3-6 days . The bulk of plasma gain is typically in the first
week.
Perceived exertion decreases:  Around 5-9 days , athletes report feeling a bit more
comfortable for the same heat exposure.
Sweat rate increase:  Takes slightly longer , on the order of 8-14 days . By the second week,
sweat rate and sweat onset improvements become very pronounced.
Full cardiovascular and thermoregulatory adaptation:  ~10-14 days of daily heat exposure is
generally enough to maximize the major adaptations for a given climate . Some small
additional gains can occur with more days, but two weeks is a good benchmark for “mostly
acclimated.” Highly fit athletes might reach this in 7-10 days, whereas less fit might need the full
14 days or a bit more.
It’s important to note that these adaptations are quickly lost if not maintained . The principle “use it
or lose it” applies: after acclimating, if the athlete goes back to cool conditions and stops any heat
exposure, their heat tolerance will decay. Research indicates a significant loss of heat adaptation after
about 1 week of no heat  (perhaps ~50% lost), and near complete loss after about 3-4 weeks  of no heat
exposure . For example, an athlete who acclimated over 2 weeks in July will start to lose those gains
by late July if they train only in cool weather or air-conditioning; by mid-August, they could be largely
back to their pre-acclimation state. However , the body “remembers” to some extent – if you reintroduce
heat, re-acclimatization is faster than the initial process . 
Coaching strategy:  If you are preparing an athlete for a key race in the heat, plan the acclimation to
finish as close to the event as practical (within ~7-10 days prior) so they carry the adaptations into
competition. If there’s a gap, consider “top-up” heat sessions (like easy runs in the heat or sauna/hot
bath post-workout) every few days to maintain adaptation. Even a couple of heat exposures per week
can help retain many of the adaptations once they are established . For athletes who live in cooler
climates, creative measures (indoor trainers in a heated room, extra layers, sauna use, etc.) might be
needed to achieve and maintain heat acclimation before traveling to a hot race.
7. Differences for Amateur vs. Elite Athletes
All athletes – recreational or elite – undergo the same  types  of heat adaptations, but there are some
differences in magnitude and management:
Fitness level effect:  As noted, well-trained (elite) athletes tend to acclimate faster and retain
adaptation longer . Their highly tuned cardiovascular systems respond quickly to the heat
stimulus. However , because they can also produce more metabolic heat (from higher absolute
intensities), they still need significant acclimation to handle racing at their level in the heat. Less
trained or amateur athletes might have more room for improvement (since their starting point is
lower , the relative gains from acclimation can feel big), but they may suffer more in initial heat
exposures and need the full recommended acclimation period. Coaches should not assume a
novice will adapt in just a few days – give them the full two weeks if possible, and progress
intensity modestly.• 2320
• 20
• 20
• 20
• 
1617
36
37
37
• 
18
7

---PAGE---

Heat acclimation protocols might be adjusted:  Elite athletes often integrate sophisticated
heat training protocols – for example, controlled hyperthermia (maintaining a target core temp
or heart rate in each session) or layering clothing to induce sweating. Amateurs can follow
simpler guidelines like doing their daily run in the heat of the day at easy pace to start. The end
goals are the same, but elite programs might use more monitoring (core temp pills, HR targets)
to optimize adaptation without overexertion. Section “Heat Acclimatization Strategies”  below
will outline practical approaches for different levels.
Sex differences:  Coaches should be aware that some evidence suggests female athletes may
require a slightly longer or more frequent heat exposure to achieve the same level of adaptation
as males . The overall benefits are similar for men and women, but if you coach female
athletes, consider giving a bit more time for heat acclimation or ensure the exposures are
sufficiently  intense.  Additionally,  menstrual  cycle  phases  can  influence  tolerance  to  heat
somewhat; communication and individualization are key.
With a clear understanding of these adaptations, one can appreciate that heat training is almost like a
natural “training boost”  for the body’s cooling and circulatory systems. Next, we’ll discuss how to
practically  achieve  these  adaptations  and  then  how  to  adjust  training  and  racing  plans  to  the
environment.
Implementing Heat Acclimatization in Training (Coaching
Strategies)
Now that we know what  adaptations we want, the question is how to get them . Heat acclimatization
can be achieved through regular training in hot conditions  or through artificial heat exposure (or a
combination of both). Here are coaching guidelines to safely and effectively acclimatize athletes to heat:
Gradual Exposure:  If possible, don’t jump straight into peak heat on day one. Gradually increase
the duration and intensity of heat exposure over several days. For example, an initial session
might be a 30-40 minute easy run in the heat, or a moderate run when it’s warm but not the
absolute hottest time of day. Over the next days, progress to longer runs or hotter times of day
as the athlete tolerates it. Research suggests that 90 minutes per day of heat exposure  (which
can be split into two sessions) is a solid target during acclimation . Athletes could do, say,
a morning run and then a shorter afternoon run in the heat, or a single longer session. Highly fit
athletes might handle closer to 2 hours per day. The key is consistency: aim for heat exposure
on consecutive days  for about 1-2 weeks .
Exercise Intensity:  Performing exercise (endurance training) in the heat is more effective for
acclimation  than  passive  heat  exposure  alone,  because  it  elevates  both  core  and  skin
temperature  and  induces  profuse  sweating .  Ensure  the  athlete  is  actually  sweating  and
getting hot in each session. That said, during the first few days, keep intensity mostly  low to
moderate  (≤50-60%  VO₂max)  for  longer  durations,  so  the  athlete  can  accumulate  heat
exposure without extreme strain . Alternatively, slightly higher intensity (~75% VO₂max) can
be used for shorter sessions (30-40 min) to induce heat stress . In practice, for runners this
might  mean  easy  to  steady  runs  initially,  or  a  tempo  run  in  heat  but  shorter  duration.  As
acclimation develops, athletes can incorporate some higher intensity intervals in the heat to
ensure specificity if they will compete at high intensities in heat (for example, doing strides or
short intervals at race-pace in the heat once they can handle easier runs). Elite athletes often use
a controlled hyperthermia  approach – e.g. they might keep exercising until reaching a target
core temp (like 38.5°C) each day, or maintain a certain heart rate that corresponds to heat strain• 
• 
38
• 
3940
41
• 
42
43
43
8

---PAGE---

. For most, simply training by feel (and not stopping the session too early when it feels
uncomfortable, unless unsafe) will naturally induce acclimation – remember , the athlete needs to
be hot enough and long enough to stimulate adaptation each day.
Hydration During Acclimation:  Advise athletes to stay well-hydrated , but there’s a balance to
strike.  Mild  dehydration  can  actually  augment  some  of  the  plasma  volume  adaptations  by
stimulating fluid retention mechanisms more strongly, but performance and safety should not
be compromised. A good approach: encourage drinking to replace a significant portion of sweat
loss, but it’s not necessary to hyper-hydrate. Avoid losing more than ~2-3% body weight in any
session to keep things safe. Starting each session well-hydrated is important. As acclimation
progresses,  thirst  sensitivity  improves  and  the  athlete  will  naturally  regulate  better ,  but
coaches should still monitor for signs of dehydration or heat illness (dizziness, cessation of
sweating, etc.).
Cooling After Training:  During the acclimation phase,  do not cool down too quickly after
workouts  (unless the athlete shows signs of heat illness). Let the body stay warm for a bit post-
exercise to prolong the heat stimulus – this could mean finishing the workout and sitting in a
warm  environment  for  another  15-20  minutes  before  showering  or  getting  into  AC.  Some
athletes take a passive heat soak  (e.g. a hot tub or sauna) after a training session to extend the
time their core temperature is elevated, thus boosting adaptation. For example, 30 minutes in a
sauna  post-exercise,  3-4  times  a  week,  has  been  shown  to  increase  plasma  volume  and
performance in the heat after a couple of weeks (this is a strategy often used if an athlete can’t
train in heat every day) . Always ensure the athlete rehydrates and cools down eventually – do
not let  them  become  severely  overheated  or  ill,  but  a  brief  additional  heat  exposure  after
exercise can be beneficial.
Environmental Specificity:  If the goal competition is in a very humid environment (tropical), try
to acclimate in humidity; if it’s in dry desert heat, acclimate in dry heat. There is some cross-over
benefit (any heat exposure helps), but the adaptations are somewhat specific to the climate
. For instance, sweating adaptations and cardiovascular changes occur in both, but the
feel of humid vs dry heat differs and the body may respond differently to evaporative vs radiative
demands. If you acclimate in Arizona desert heat and then race in Florida swamp humidity, you’ll
still be much better off than no acclimation, but Florida’s humidity might feel a bit tougher until
you adjust. In practice, do the best you can with what you have – even training in dry heat will
largely prepare an athlete for humid heat, with perhaps a small additional caution that humidity
might tax them a bit more.
Monitoring the Athlete:  Coaches should monitor heart rate, body mass (for dehydration), and
subjective well-being daily. It’s normal for heart rates to be high the first few sessions and
gradually come down with each subsequent day (a sign acclimation is happening). If an athlete
shows signs of heat exhaustion (pale, headache, confusion, chills, stop sweating, etc.), stop the
session, cool them down, and resume acclimation the next day at a lower intensity. Acclimation
should be uncomfortable (some strain) but  not dangerous . A rule of thumb: If the athlete
cannot keep their pace or power above a minimal level or feels they are nearing collapse, it’s
beyond safe acclimation stress – time to stop and recover . Each day, the strain should lessen for
the same heat exposure  – use that trend as a guide.
Duration of Program:  Aim for 10-14 consecutive days  of heat training for a robust acclimation
. If consecutive days aren’t possible, try not to have big gaps; a day off or an easy day is
okay, but remember that adaptations start to decay quickly with time off. Some protocols use
slightly longer periods with days off interspersed (e.g. 5 days on, 1 off, 5 on). What’s critical is44
• 
45
• 
46
• 
4748
• 
49
• 
4117
9

---PAGE---

accumulating enough heat exposure. After 2 weeks, you can switch to a maintenance mode
(heat exposures 2-3 times per week) if needed, or just keep training in the heat if that’s practical.
Just be cautious about overall fatigue: heat training can add to an athlete’s fatigue levels, so
integrate it with their training load intelligently (possibly substitute some hard workouts with
heat workouts, because heat itself is a form of stress).
Advanced  Methods:  For  professional  or  highly  competitive  athletes,  consider  advanced
techniques like  “heat camps”  (intensive heat acclimation blocks, similar to altitude camps) or
combining  heat  with  altitude  (some  athletes  do  altitude  training  then  heat  acclimation
sequentially). Recent studies suggest heat acclimation can even provide some of the aerobic
benefits of altitude training without needing to travel to altitude , but combining the two
at the same time isn’t generally recommended due to excessive stress. Also, remember that
training in heat might necessitate reducing volume or intensity slightly to manage stress –
quality sessions could be done in cooler conditions while easy sessions are done in heat during a
preparation  phase,  to  avoid  loss  of  fitness.  Another  method  is  sleeping  in  a  hot  room  or
wearing extra clothes during easy runs to simulate heat stress when actual heat isn’t available –
though be careful with these to avoid heat illness; always prioritize safety over squeezing in
adaptation.
In summary, heat acclimation training should be approached like any other training component :
with a clear plan, progressive overload, and monitoring. When done correctly, your athlete will finish
the acclimation block feeling sweaty but strong – able to handle a hot environment with confidence.
They’ll have lower heart rate, cooler core temperature, and feel “in control” in conditions that used to
feel brutal. This sets the stage for adjusting race strategy and pacing, which we’ll cover next.
Adjusting Pacing and Performance Targets for Heat and
Humidity
Even with full acclimatization, athletes will not perform at the same absolute pace in 35°C weather as
they would at 15°C. Heat places limits on the body that must be respected. A crucial coaching skill is
adjusting  training  paces  and  race  targets  for  environmental  conditions .  Pacing  adjustments
prevent  athletes  from  pushing  too  hard  relative  to  what  their  heat-limited  physiology  can  handle,
thereby avoiding burnout or heat illness. Below we provide guidelines and algorithms to estimate how
much to adjust paces based on temperature and humidity (with a focus on dew point , a measure that
combines  temperature  and  humidity  effect).  We  also  include  a  pseudocode-style  breakdown  for
implementing these adjustments. 
Why Adjust for Heat and Humidity?
In simple terms, every extra degree of heat or % of humidity slows you down. The higher the air
temperature, the harder it is to shed heat; the higher the humidity (or dew point), the harder it is to cool
via sweating. Runners and other endurance athletes will have a  higher heart rate and perceived
effort at the same pace  when it’s hot and humid, meaning they can’t sustain their normal pace for as
long. Thus, training or racing at goal pace in extreme heat can be unrealistic and dangerous. Adjusting
pace targets keeps the effort in the correct zone. For instance, a marathoner who could run a 3:30
marathon (8:00/mile pace) in cool conditions might only manage ~3:45 or 4:00 in very hot conditions –
and that’s with smart adjustments and acclimation.
Dew  Point  as  a  Guide:  Dew  point  is  the  temperature  at  which  air  becomes  fully  saturated  with
moisture. It’s a single number that reflects humidity’s effect. Many coaches use dew point because it• 
5051
10

---PAGE---

directly correlates with how “sticky” or oppressively humid it feels and how much sweat evaporation will
be hindered. A dew point under 55°F (13°C) is comfortable; 60-65°F is noticeable; 70°F (21°C) or above is
extremely humid and greatly stresses cooling. Generally, a combination of high air temperature  and
high dew point is the worst-case scenario for performance.
Algorithm 1: Temperature + Dew Point Adjustment (Hadley’s Method)
Coach Mark Hadley developed a handy rule-of-thumb formula that many runners use . The
method: add the air temperature (°F) and dew point (°F) , and use the sum to determine how much to
slow down your pace. We’ll call this sum H (for “heat index,” though it’s not the official Heat Index, it’s a
simplified tool). For example, if it’s 80°F with a dew point of 65°F, then H = 80 + 65 = 145 . Using H, you
adjust your target pace by a certain percentage: 
If H ≤ 100:  No significant adjustment needed (cool enough). 
H 101–110:  ~0% to 0.5% slower than goal pace (virtually no change to very slight). 
H 111–120:  ~0.5% to 1.0% slowdown. 
H 121–130:  ~1% to 2% slowdown. 
H 131–140:  ~2% to 3% slowdown. 
H 141–150:  ~3% to 4.5% slowdown. 
H 151–160:  ~4.5% to 6% slowdown. 
H 161–170:  ~6% to 8% slowdown. 
H 171–180:  ~8% to 10% slowdown. 
H > 180:  Hard running not recommended  (conditions too dangerous) .
This is a guideline range; the higher end of each range would be for the upper part of that H interval or
for athletes who are very sensitive to heat, and the lower end for those who are well acclimated or more
heat-tolerant .  For  instance,  if  H  =  145  (like  the  80°F/65°F  example),  the  table  says  3.0%–4.5%
slowdown. A well-acclimated athlete might choose ~3% while an average person might use ~4.5%. Let’s
apply it in practice:
Example:  It’s 85°F with a dew point of 68°F. Then H = 85 + 68 = 153. According to the chart, H in the
151–160 range suggests about 4.5% to 6.0%  pace adjustment. If the athlete’s goal tempo run pace is
9:00 per mile in cool conditions, 5% slower would be 9:27 per mile . In fact, an example from
Hadley’s guide: 85°F/68°F yielded an adjusted tempo pace of ~9:27 instead of 9:00 for an acclimated
runner who chose a 5% (middle of range) adjustment . This kind of adjustment ensures the runner is
training at the right effort level – hitting the intended physiological intensity without overheating or
overtraining. On race day, similar adjustments help set realistic targets (or decide if finishing might be
wiser than pushing for a PR). 
In pseudocode form , one could implement Hadley’s rule like: 
INPUT: AirTemp_F, DewPoint_F, NormalPace (min/mile)
H = AirTemp_F + DewPoint_F
if H <= 100: pace_factor = 1.00  (no slowdown)
else if H <= 110: pace_factor = 1.005  (up to 0.5% slower)
else if H <= 120: pace_factor = 1.01   (1% slower)
else if H <= 130: pace_factor = 1.02   (2% slower)
else if H <= 140: pace_factor = 1.03   (3% slower)
else if H <= 150: pace_factor = 1.045  (4.5% slower)
else if H <= 160: pace_factor = 1.06   (6% slower)5253
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 54
55
56
56
11

---PAGE---

else if H <= 170: pace_factor = 1.08   (8% slower)
else if H <= 180: pace_factor = 1.10   (10% slower)
else:  # H > 180
    print("Warning: Extreme heat! Avoid hard running.")
    pace_factor = 1.10+   (at least 10% slower, or consider not running)
Then  AdjustedPace = NormalPace * pace_factor . (The ranges can be interpolated; the above is a
simplified assignment at range mid-points.)
This algorithm gives a ballpark. Always remember this is an estimate  – individual variations are large.
Acclimation status, body size, age, etc., all influence how much heat slows someone down . Use the
lower percentage if your athlete is heat-adapted, small in body size, or particularly efficient in heat; use
the higher end if they are not acclimated or struggle in heat.
Algorithm 2: Temperature and Humidity Percent Slows (Combined Formula)
Another approach some coaches use is a linear formula that separately accounts for how far the
temperature is above a certain baseline and how far humidity is above a baseline. One example (as
used in a heat adjustment calculator) is: 
Baseline : 60°F air temperature and 60% relative humidity. (Many runners find performance
starts to noticeably decline above these levels.) 
Adjustment factors : For every 1°F above 60°F, slow pace by ~0.4%. For every 1% RH above 60%,
slow an additional ~0.2% . (This particular model assumes dew point and humidity effects
are additive.)
In formula form: 
pace_increase_percent = 0.4 * (AirTemp_F - 60) + 0.2 * (Humidity% - 60)
If either term is negative (meaning temp or humidity below 60), you’d take it as zero (no need to speed
up beyond normal pace just because it’s cool; 60°F and 60% is considered ideal baseline here).
For example, suppose it’s 75°F and 70% humidity during a training run. Relative to 60°F/60%, that’s 15°F
higher and 10% higher . The formula gives: pace increase % = 0.4 15 + 0.2 10 = 6 + 2 = 8% slowdown . So if
the athlete’s normal easy pace is 8:00/mile, an 8% slowdown suggests about 8:38/mile would achieve
the same effort level. If it were 80°F and 80% (20°F and 20% above baseline), that’s 0.4 20 + 0.2 20 = 8 + 4
=  12% slower  needed – a very significant adjustment (8:00 pace -> ~8:58 pace). This illustrates how
quickly the needed adjustment grows in very muggy conditions. Every degree and every percentage
of humidity counts , as the calculator site says – and it’s true, the cumulative effect can be large.
This algorithm yields results in the same ballpark as the dew point method. For instance, our earlier
case 85°F/68°F (which was dew point method H=153) gave ~5% from Hadley’s table; using this formula,
humidity can be derived (68°F dew point at 85°F is ~65% RH, give or take). Plugging roughly: AirTemp 85
(25 above 60 = 25 0.4=10%), RH ~65 (5 above 60 = 5 0.2=1%), total ~11% slowdown. That seems a bit
higher;  perhaps  that  formula  was  conservative  (or  the  dew  point  method  spread  the  adjustment
differently). In any case, both methods agree that  extreme humidity and heat can easily require
double-digit percentage pace slowdowns .57
• 
• 
5859
60
12

---PAGE---

Note on Using These Algorithms
These adjustments are intended to keep the  physiological stress  equivalent. In training, that
means if the schedule calls for a tempo run at threshold effort, the athlete should adjust pace so
that  they  are  at  threshold  heart  rate/RPE ,  not  necessarily  the  usual  threshold  speed.  The
algorithms help predict that adjusted pace. In a race, the adjustments can predict how much
slower a finish time might be compared to ideal conditions, which can guide strategy (e.g.
aiming for a place instead of a time, or scheduling extra cooling measures).
Always encourage athletes to listen to their bodies first . No formula knows how you feel on a
given day. Heat can affect athletes differently on different days (hydration status, sleep, recent
illness, etc., play roles). If the formula says 5% slower but the athlete still feels it’s hard, they
should slow more. If they feel surprisingly good (perhaps due to a cloud cover or a breeze that
formulas don’t account for), they can go a bit faster . Remind them that effort and heart rate  are
good anchors in heat training. In fact, some coaches simply use heart rate zones or power (for
cyclists) to auto-adjust – the athlete maintains their normal heart rate zone, and if pace is slower ,
so be it.
Example scenario for a coach:  It’s a brutally hot day with a wet-bulb globe temperature (WBGT)
reading in the high risk zone. You have 6 x 1-mile repeats on the schedule at 10K race pace for
your advanced group. Using these adjustments, you calculate that 10K pace (say 6:30/mile for
one athlete normally) should be adjusted by ~5-6% because it’s 90°F with 70°F dew point in the
evening. That suggests targeting ~6:50-7:00 per mile for those repeats instead of 6:30. You’d
convey this to the athletes and also suggest extra rest between reps, and a focus on hydration
and cooling (e.g. pouring water on head). The result: athletes complete the workout at the
appropriate effort without overheating. Without adjustment, had they tried 6:30s, they likely
would have blown up mid-workout or put themselves at risk.
Avoiding the hottest times:  Sometimes the best “adjustment” is to change the plan. If an
athlete has the flexibility, you might move a hard workout to early morning or late evening when
it’s cooler , or even use an indoor treadmill with AC for key sessions, and save heat exposure for
easier runs. This is especially true for amateur athletes who may not tolerate heat as well or
don’t need every small adaptation. Know when to train in heat and when to escape it. During a
heatwave, it might be wise to convert an interval session to a steady run and postpone the hard
effort until conditions ease or the athlete is better adapted.  Safety first.  Running in a 180+
(temp+dew point) situation should be done with extreme caution or not at all  – it’s a day for
cross-training indoors or very easy efforts with monitoring.
Summary of Pacing Adjustments
To wrap up, here are key takeaways on adjusting pacing for heat:
Use objective measures (dew point, heat index)  to quantify how extreme the conditions are,
and adjust training paces accordingly (see algorithms above). This removes some guesswork and
helps athletes accept slower paces as appropriate , not as a sign of personal failure.
Use subjective and internal cues : Monitor heart rate and RPE. If the athlete’s HR is sky-high for
a given pace, that pace is too fast for that day. Encourage using heart rate monitors especially
during heat acclimation phases – they can alert you to cardiac drift and impending dehydration.
Adjust race expectations : If your athlete has a race in heat, set a realistic goal. Perhaps target a
finish time 5-10% slower than their cool-weather potential, depending on conditions. Plan extra
cooling (wearing a cap and sunglasses, dumping water on head, drinking at every aid, even ice in• 
• 
• 
• 
61
• 
• 
• 
13

---PAGE---

clothing if available). Often, racing in heat becomes more about competition (placing) than time,
since everyone slows down. Make sure the athlete paces conservatively in the first half, as
overheating early can be disastrous. Negative splitting in heat is rare; more common is a big
slowdown if paced too ambitiously at the start.
Acclimatization helps but doesn’t eliminate all effects : An acclimated athlete might handle a
given hot condition with, say, only a 3% slowdown needed where a non-acclimated might need
7%. Adaptation narrows the gap, but physics and physiology still impose limits. Even the best
heat-adapted marathoner in the world will run slower at 30°C than at 10°C. So use acclimation to
gain an edge, but still respect the conditions on race day.
By following these guidelines, coaches can ensure their athletes train smart in the heat, make the
necessary adjustments, and arrive at competitions prepared to perform optimally given the conditions .
With the combination of physiological adaptations from heat training and intelligent pacing strategies,
endurance athletes can thrive even when the thermometer soars.
Conclusion
Heat can be a formidable opponent for endurance athletes, but with knowledge and preparation, it’s an
opponent  that  can  be  managed  and  even  turned  to  one’s  advantage.  We’ve  seen  that
thermoregulation  during exercise is a balancing act – the body works to shed excess heat through
sweating  and  blood  redistribution,  but  this  can  strain  the  cardiovascular  system  and  impair
performance.  However ,  through  heat  acclimatization ,  athletes  undergo  remarkable  adaptations:
expanded plasma volume for better cardiovascular stability, enhanced sweating capacity for superior
cooling, and conservation of electrolytes, all leading to improved tolerance and performance in hot
conditions. These adaptations can be developed in as little as 1-2 weeks of targeted heat training
 and are beneficial to athletes across the spectrum – whether you’re a recreational marathoner
aiming to complete a humid race comfortably, or an elite triathlete seeking a competitive edge in Kona’s
broiling conditions.
For coaches, the dual approach is clear:  get your athletes heat-adapted  when needed, and  adjust
their race/train plans  to the weather . We’ve provided concrete algorithms and examples to guide pace
adjustments based on temperature and humidity, which can be incorporated into training software or
calculated on the fly. Remember that these tools are starting points – individualize them as you learn an
athlete’s responses. Some athletes might be “heavy sweaters” who need more fluid and salt, others
might  struggle  more  with  humidity  than  dry  heat.  Continuous  education,  monitoring,  and
communication are key. 
In the end, successful endurance coaching in the heat comes down to respecting the environment. As
the saying goes, “It’s not the heat, it’s the humidity”  – and truthfully, it’s both. By applying the science of
thermoregulation and heat acclimatization in a coach’s practical context, you can help athletes of any
level transform heat from a fear factor into a well-managed element of competition. They will go into
their hot races not with dread, but with confidence, knowing their bodies are prepared and their pacing
plan is sound. And when others fade in the heat, your athletes will be the ones executing a smart race,
leveraging their heat training to push strong to the finish line.
Stay cool, train smart, and coach on!
Sources:
Powers, S.K. & Howley, E.T. Exercise Physiology: Theory and Application to Fitness and Performance
(10th Ed.)  – Exercise and the Environment chapter . • 
16
17
• 
62122036
14

---PAGE---

Casa, D. et al. Sport and Physical Activity in the Heat – Maximizing Performance and Safety  (2018)
. 
Physiopedia: “Heat Acclimation” – summary of heat’s impact on performance and acclimation
adaptations . 
Sawka, M.N. et al. Exercise-Heat Acclimatization  (GSSI Sports Science Exchange No. 153, 2019) –
detailed review of adaptations and strategies . 
Precision Hydration: “Could heat training enhance your performance in all conditions?” –
discusses plasma volume and performance gains . 
RunFit MKE (K. Berenson, 2020): “How to Calculate Pace Adjustment for Hot Weather Running” –
presents Coach Hadley’s temperature+dew point method . 
Breno Melo Coaching: “Heat & Humidity Pace Calculator” – outlines 0.4%/°F and 0.2%/% humidity
adjustment factors . 
Heat Acclimation -
Physiopedia
https://www.physio-pedia.com/Heat_Acclimation
HOW TO CALCULATE PACE ADJUSTMENT FOR HOT WEATHER RUNNING —
RunFit MKE
https://www.runfitmke.com/blog/how-to-calculate-pace-adjustment-for-hot-weather-running
Heat
Acclimatization to Improve Athletic Performance in Warm-Hot Environments - Gatorade Sports Science
Institute
https://www.gssiweb.org/sports-science-exchange/article/sse-153-heat-acclimatization-to-improve-athletic-performance-in-
warm-hot-environments
Heat training: could it enhance your performance? by Precision Fuel & Hydration
https://www.precisionhydration.com/performance-advice/performance/could-heat-training-enhance-your-performance-in-
all-conditions/?srsltid=AfmBOor-epTYyvrQVVgaIKKLYf9wb99rR-dD2VtVLl10qoRPoiKG3KZD
Post-exercise sauna bathing for endurance athletes
https://www.endureiq.com/blog/post-exercise-sauna-bathing-for-endurance-athletes-when-and-why
Heat & Humidity Running Calculator | Adjust Race Pace
https://brenoamelo.com/pages/heat-humidity-calculator?srsltid=AfmBOoqspZJBNp-
v03l8vdaHNJ2JjTytK6O45h0pUYimQVU4O_86gQOZ• 63
14
• 
10 19 64
• 
65 66 30
• 
24 27
• 
54 56
• 
58
1 2 3 4 5 6 910 11 12 13 14 17 19 20 25 26 32 33 36 43 62 63 64
752 53 54 55 56 57 61
815 16 18 21 22 23 29 30 31 34 35 37 39 40 41 42 44 45 47 48 49 65 66
24 27 28 38 50 51
46
58 59 60
15

---PAGE---

